[Extension] Processing (#907)
radiantearth/stac-spec: extensions/processing/README.md

# Processing Extension Specification

- **Title: Processing**
- **Identifier: proc**
- **Field Name Prefix: proc**
- **Scope: Item, Collection**
- **Extension [Maturity Classification](../README.md#extension-maturity): Proposal**

Processing metadata is considered to be data that indicate from which processing chain a data originates and how the data itself has been produced. Overall, it helps to increase traceability and search among processing levels and multiple algorithm versions.

Often, data items are the result of one or more waterfall processing pipeline. Tracing information such as the processing facility , the algorithm version or the processing date helps in the data version management.

This extension applies to STAC Items and STAC Collections. As these processing information are often closely bound to the collection level and therefore are shared across all items, it is recommended adding the fields to the corresponding STAC Collection.

- [Examples](examples/): [Sentinel-1 Item](examples/sentinel1-item.json),  [Sentinel-2 Level 1C Collection](examples/sentinel2-collection.json)
- [JSON Schema](json-schema/schema.json)

> ## Item and Collection fields

Reviewer: We have recently also discussed with @prateekbudhwar and colleagues to add processing details to STAC (outdated PR #881). The idea we had was to simply add a `lineage` free-text field to the providers array in Collections so that you can track the processing for each entity that has processed date. Would you think that makes also sense for your fields?

Example:
```
{
  "stac_version": "1.0.0-beta.2",
  "id": "...",
  "description": "...",
  "license": "proprietary",
  "providers": [
    {
      "name": "European Union/ESA/Copernicus",
      "roles": [
        "producer",
        "licensor"
      ],
      "proc:lineage": "Atmospheric Correction..."
    },
    {
      "name": "SomeComp",
      "roles": [
        "processor"
      ],
      "proc:lineage": "Foo bar... NDVI processing..."
    },
    {
      "name": "Amazon",
      "roles": [
        "host"
      ],
      "proc:lineage": "Conversion to COG..."
    }
  ],
  "extent": {...}
}
```

I think for Collections it may make sense to push your suggested fields into the providers array like proc:lineage in this example. Could be overkill for items and we just put it into properties there. Thoughts?

Anyway, could we add a field proc:lineage to the proposal? Free-text string.

Author: Indeed, that's the common idea with this processing extension. So I totally see lineage could be part of this proposal. My only doubt is about having it at assets level. For us, an item is an atomic product even if split of several assets and thus should share the same mileage. For instance, a sentinel-2 product can have 13 bands that have all been processed during the same "lineage" and thus 13 assets all having the "proc:lineage": "Atmospheric Correction..." property would be overkill IMO.

Reviewer: Your proposal was going to be mainly for properties in items, right? I think that is correct and I didn't meant to say something different here. You could put them in assets, like any other property, but I doubt providers will do that if not absolutely required. So I'm fine with it.

Reviewer 2: +1 for proc:lineage 

And defining it at the Item property level makes sense to me, and then people could choose to use it at the asset level if they really wanted.

Re-using proc:lineage at the provider level for Collections also makes sense to me.

Author: I have replaced `processing:name` with processing:lineage` referring to https://wiki.earthdata.nasa.gov/display/NASAISO/Lineage+Information.
For the moment, I have left all processing properties at the same level extending to the asset. I don't know exactly how to specify the extension with providers.
Feel free to suggest other places where they could be specified. On my side, I am very attach to the formalism 1 item = 1 dataset but there are probably several other use cases.

Reviewer: I can do the Collection work for you and also do the JSON Schema. :-)

For Items, the fields are placed in the properties. For Collections, the fields are placed in the summaries of the Collection.

| Field Name                  | Type      | Description                                                  |
| --------------------------- | --------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |

> | proc:name         | string | The name of the processing of the data that is commonly used. For example, `GRD Post Processing` for "GRD" product of Sentinel-1 satellites. |

Reviewer: What's the difference between proc:name and for example sar:product_type? Could that be somehow aligned?

Author: proc:name would be a label for the processing like an identifier but maybe a bit redundant if the `lineage` property is integrated. `sar:product_type`, which IMO should be a common metadata, is the family product identifier defined by the provider

Reviewer: Yes, we discussed whether product_type should be in common metadata. The reason not to include it is that we want to define a list of "common" values like in the SAR extension, but that is a bit hard in common metadata. I guess we'll have follow-up discussions.

Replacing proc:name with proc:lineage makes sense, I think.

| proc:level        | string | **REQUIRED.** The name commonly used to refer to the processing level to make it easier to search for product level across collections or items. The short name must be used (only `L`, not `Level`). See the [list of suggested processing levels](#suggested-processing-levels). |

> | proc:facility     | string    | The name of the facility that produced the data. For example, `Copernicus S1 Core Ground Segment - DPA` for product of Sentinel-1 satellites. |

Reviewer: What is the use case for this field?

Author: If you mean the facility, it allows filtering product on their processing center origin. For instance, to select products produced by a specific ground segment components.

Reviewer: Okay, so that's mainly for the "original" products, I guess? I must admit I wouldn't know what to put there if I process something at - for example - AWS or even locally. ;-)

| proc:software     | string    | The name of the software that produced the data. For example, `Sentinel-1 IPF` for the software that produces Sentinel-1 satellites data. |

> | proc:version      | string | The version of the software that produced the data. For example, `002.71` for the software that produces Sentinel-1 satellites data. |

Reviewer: I think I'd prefer proc:software_version to clarify the scope of the field.

Also, I'm wondering whether multiple software could be required? Then it might make sense to do something like:

```
proc:software: {
  "Sentinel-1 IPF": "002.71",
  "Other Tool": "1.1.1"
}
``` 
or something similar (could also be an array with objects).

Author: Fine with the pair software "name:version"

Reviewer 2: +1 to software_version. I'm neutral on string vs array/object

| processing:level        | string              | The name commonly used to refer to the processing level to make it easier to search for product level across collections or items. The short name must be used (only `L`, not `Level`). See the [list of suggested processing levels](#suggested-processing-levels). |
| processing:facility     | string              | The name of the facility that produced the data. For example, `Copernicus S1 Core Ground Segment - DPA` for product of Sentinel-1 satellites. |
| processing:software     | Map<string, string> | A dictionary with name/version for key/value describing one or more softwares that produced the data. For example, `"Sentinel-1 IPF":"002.71"` for the software that produces Sentinel-1 satellites data. |

*At least one of the fields must be specified.*

### Processing Date Time

The time of the processing is directly specified via the `created` properties of the target asset as specified in the [STAC Common metadata](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/master/item-spec/common-metadata.md#date-and-time)

### Linking the items

> In items declaring this `processing` extension, it is recommended to add one or more [links](https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/blob/master/item-spec/item-spec.md#link-object) with `derived-fom` or `via` relationships to the eventual source items used in the processing. They could be used to trace back the processing history of the dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In items declaring this `processing` extension, it is recommended to add one or more [links](../../item-spec/item-spec.md#relation-types) with `derived_from` or `via` relationships to the eventual source items used in the processing. They could be used to trace back the processing history of the dataset.
```

| L2          | Retrieved environmental variables (e.g., ocean wave height, soil-moisture, ice concentration) at the same resolution and location as the level 1 source data. A wide variety of sub-level products are possible (see below). | |
| L3          | Data or retrieved environmental variables which have been spatiallyand/or temporally re-sampled (i.e., derived from level 1 or 2 products). Such re-sampling may include averaging and compositing.  A wide variety of sub-level products are possible (see below). | [ENVISAT Level-3](http://envisat.esa.int/level3/), [Sentinel-2 L3](https://s2gm.sentinel-hub.com/) |
| L4          | Model output or results from analyses of lower level data (i.e.,variables that are not directly measured by the instruments, but are derived fromthese measurements) |

## Implementations

> [DotNetStac](https://github.com/Terradue/DotNetStac) uses this extension specification for the processing extension plugin with accessor to the value specified of this extension.

Reviewer: Depending on the outcomes in https://github.com/radiantearth/stac-spec/pull/920 we might ask you to (re)move this.

Author: Fine with me

Reviewer 2: Though do you have catalogs produced with dotnetstac that use it? Even if they aren't public, you can describe it and say how large a catalog it is, or how many catalogs have been produced with DotNetStac. I think you could mention they are produced by DotNetStac and link to it, but the main implementation bullet point should be about the catalogs (also ok if none are produced yet / haven't yet been done with the latest changes, just add it in when they are).

Author: No public catalog so far. I will update as soon as we have more consistent examples. I remove the reference to DotNetStac to move forward with the merge. No problem with that.
